Schema validation guide (#647)
liveblocks/liveblocks: docs/pages/guides/schema-validation.mdx

---
meta:
  title: "Schema Validation"
  parentTitle: "Guides”
  description: "Learn how to use Schema Validation to ensure data integrity in your application”
---

## Why schema validation?

> Schema validation is essential for future-proofing your application and ensuring that implementing new features or data structures into your app will keep the integration you have established with Liveblocks. Our storage block is flexible in that you can store different Type structures depending on your unique needs. What happens if you alter some (or all) of a storage object’s properties but have existing data?

Author: I like this summary but would probably shy away from including messaging about malicious intent. Are you ok with that?    I would think that a user would expect we would have some protection against csrf attack or similarly (even if we don’t)
I will update to include other points minus this one until I get clarity from you :)

The issue is that storage with Liveblocks contains a different type structure than your application (client)- which could break your application. How do you avoid this situation? By enforcing schema validation. While optional, schema validation is a vital tool for applications in a production environment- it ensures that errors like the one described above can be avoided and resolved while working in development mode. We’ll elaborate a bit more on the inner workings of schema validation below.

> ## How schema validation works

Author: Sounds good.

When a room enforces schema validation and the client updates values in the storage, the operation is sent to the Liveblocks server, verifying that the updated Storage Tree is consistent with the defined schema attached to the room. If the verification succeeds, the storage data gets updated and synchronized with other users (clients) in the room. If the schema validation fails, the mutation gets rejected: storage will not be updated, other clients will never see the mutation, and the client that made the mutation will throw an error, and the developer can fix it. Situations like this should only happen in development mode, and the issue should be fixed by the developer, similar to fixing a TypeScript error before publishing it to production.

## Create a schema

> To create a schema, you will need to POST to the schemas endpoint:

Reviewer: Now that we have a basic dashboard, I would update this section to show the flow through the UI and also indicate that it's possible to use the API with a link to our[ HTTP endpoints ](https://liveblocks.io/docs/api-reference/rest-api-endpoints).

Author: Will do :)

Author: I think we discussed but are we adding the documentation to http endpoints before launch? I saw a story assigned to me surrounding this, but was shown as something that would occur later

```ts

> POST https://api.liveblocks.io/v2/schemas

Reviewer: This endpoint has been updated in the last couple of day: https://www.notion.so/liveblocks/Schema-Validation-30a913b25050484696b6b3620e463f46#9774d6f2f5444429beb35d1188b2706b

Sorry for the last minute change 😬

Reviewer 2: @taylorpwhipp Don't worry if not all the details of the examples/HTTP requests are correct yet. We _think_ it's now stable, but we may find something last minute that will still demand a change. Once you're done updating everything else about this guide, please ping me so I can make sure I do a final check that all the details about the HTTP reqeusts and code examples are correct! 🙏

Author: No worries @GuillaumeSalles and thanks for the clarification @nvie :) will ping you today

{
  "id": "some-id",
  "name": "Your schema name",
  "data": `{
    type Storage {
      // your data schema will go here
    }
  }`,
}

```

> Note that the data type will be of type string because the schema will be parsed. For more information, see our [Schema Language documentation](xxx).

Reviewer: After re reading the flow of the guide, I think having a schema language specification might be great for the launch. I can help you with this.

Author: Ok.  I know we have the details in the design spec- is there much deviation from this?

Reviewer 2: Agreed, having that language specification would be fantastic! Beware of using the spec for this, though @taylorpwhipp! The language set we offer in the private beta is a lot more limited than the "vision" formulated in the spec yet. We'll be working on growing the supported language constructs, but most of that will happen after the launch and while we're actively in private beta.

      theme: String
    }
    type storage {
      logo: LiveObject<Logo>
    }
  `
}
// 200 Response
{
   "versionId": "collaborative-form@1",
   "schemaId": "collaborative-form",
   "name": "Collaborative Form",
   "createdAt": "2023-01-22T15:10:25.225Z",
   "updatedAt": "2023-01-22T15:10:25.225Z"
}
```

To attach this schema to a room, you will POST to the rooms endpoint:

```ts
POST https://api.liveblocks.io/v2/rooms/{id}/schema
{
  "schema": "collaborative-form@1"
}
```

To simulate the importance of schema validation and also demonstrate how operations can fail, we will change the nested value of `name` to `organization`:

```tsx file="_app.tsx"
    <RoomProvider
      id={roomId}
      initialPresence={{ focusedId: null }}
      initialStorage={{
        logo: new LiveObject({
          organization: "Acme Inc.",
          theme: "light",
        }),
      }}
    >
```
In `index.tsx`, we will update all references from `name` to `organization`: this is a simple but common instance of updating variable names, which could easily break our integration. 
After updating and running locally, we should now see an error because our deployed schema and client code are out of sync.

> <!----Insert sample failure message here, once this is released. You also mentioned demonstrating a refresh, but I have no way to record this currently !--->

Reviewer: @nvie @BitPhinix: I didn't have time to review the latest PR about rejections, but would it be possible to provide a screenshot or the error message corresponding to this issue? 🙏

Author: This would be great 👍

Reviewer 2: Here is a screenshot I faked locally. I've made a video and a static screen shot. Use whichever one you like best. I think the animated version can help to see the interaction in an app.

The error message itself is completely faked and will likely change a lot in the next couple of weeks.

**Video:**
https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/83844/216575242-18933270-8ae7-4ac1-9a36-c2a78b4717c9.mp4

**Static screenshot:**
<img width="1276" alt="Screen Shot 2023-02-03 at 11 22 46@2x" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/83844/216576155-13a85093-0ce2-400d-bf22-1dd1852f559b.png">

Reviewer 2: Ugh. I copy/pasted the incorrect fake error message that doesn't make sense in the spreadsheet app. I'll redo the shots.

Reviewer 2: Here is a screenshot I faked locally. I've made a video and a static screen shot. Use whichever one you like best. I think the animated version can help to see the interaction in an app.

The error message itself is completely faked and will likely change a lot in the next couple of weeks.

**Video:**

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/83844/216578151-6ae25bdc-9c17-4d2d-80e1-ae3e212a8440.mp4

**Static screenshot:**

<img width="1320" alt="Screen Shot 2023-02-03 at 11 29 46@2x" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/83844/216577786-7ee54263-2355-491b-86f6-6c4df107974a.png">

When an instance like this occurs, it's indicative of a bug in your app, which you should fix in development, just like how you have to fix a TypeScript bug in your application before shipping it. 

<!----I believe the plan here was to insert some components that were used on the comments page --->

> We’re opening up a private beta waitlist

Reviewer: I'm going to add the button tomorrow with the link to the form.

CTA to sign up for it, and to let us know their use case for it 
<!--- -->

## What’s to come

> The ability to add schema validation via API calls is powerful- but we’re not stopping there. In the future, we will expand the ability to add schema validation with the touch of a button. Our road map includes the ability to generate Typescript types from the schema. In addition, schema validation with Liveblocks will consist of online management and editing of your schemas from within the dashboard (and you can currently sign up for the waitlist here too!) 

Reviewer: One thing that I would add.

Schema are versioned so it's paving the way to build migration tools in the future.

Author: Of course.

---
meta:
  title: "Schema Validation"
  parentTitle: "Guides"
  description: "Learn how to use Schema Validation to ensure data integrity in your application "
---

> ## Why Schema Validation™?

Author: lol i was definitely confused, i was like, this is a general thing that is used all over 😆

> Schema validation is an important feature for future-proofing your application and ensuring that implementing new features or data structures into your app does not break the integration you have established with Liveblocks.  Our Storage block is flexible in the sense that you can use it to store different Type structures dependent upon your unique needs.  What happens though, if you alter your application by updating some or all of the properties of an object in Storage and you have existing data?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Schema validation is an important feature for future-proofing your application and ensuring that implementing new features or data structures into your app does not break the integration you have established with Liveblocks. Our conflict-free data types are flexible in the sense that you can use them to store different Type structures dependent upon your unique needs. What happens though, if you alter your application by updating some or all of the properties of an object in storage and you have existing data?
```

We shouldn't say "presence block". or "storage block", now we have four main features for collaborative documents, as you can see in the tree map here: https://preview.liveblocks.io/

- Presence
- Broadcast
- Conflict-free data types
- Comments (soon)

And why is Type with an uppercase first letter?

> The issue is that Storage with Liveblocks contains a different type structure than your application (client)- which could break your application.   How do you avoid this situation?  By enforcing Schema Validation.  While optional, Schema Validation is an extremely important tool for productionalized applications- it ensures that errors like the one described above could be avoided and resolved while working in development mode.  We'll elaborate a bit more on the inner workings of schema validation below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The issue is that Storage with Liveblocks contains a different type structure than your application (client)- which could break your application. How do you avoid this situation? By enforcing Schema Validation. While optional, Schema Validation is an extremely important tool for productionalized applications- it ensures that errors like the one described above could be avoided and resolved while working in development mode. We'll elaborate a bit more on the inner workings of schema validation below.
```

There are a lot of double spaces, there should only be one every time

When a Room is first loaded, the key `liveblocksSchema` from Storage is inspected: if no value is present, then schema validation is not enforced.  If there is a value, then that value of the schema is parsed and assigned to the Room where its values are distributed to the node tree.

<!-- Insert an animation here !-->

If schema validation is not enforced, all operations in the room are accepted. 
For example, imagine that a client performs an operation that updates the Storage Tree:  regardless of whether or not this could break the application, Liveblocks has no opinion on whether or not this operation should be completed and accepts the incoming operation.  After the operation is completed, the updated Storage Tree is forwarded to other users in the room. 

> In the case where schema validation is enforced, when the client performs an operation that updates the Storage Tree, it is sent to the Liveblocks server which verifies that the updated Storage Tree is consistent with the defined schema attached to the Room.  If the verification succeeds, the Op is acknowledged by the initial client, and the Storage Tree is updated and forwarded to other users (clients) in the room.  If the operation verification fails, a `RejectedOpsServerMsg` is sent to the client.  The Storage Tree is not updated. In this instance, it is the responsibility of the developer to resolve the error.

Reviewer 2: Again, I would avoid "Op". It's an important part of CRDT internals to us, but not a detail we expose to users. Let's stick with "update" or "mutation", which is a verb that [shows up in our APIs](https://liveblocks.io/docs/api-reference/liveblocks-react#useMutation) more publicly.

And with respect to _"`RejectedOpsServerMsg` is sent to the client"_, which is very accurate, but our users would have no clue what that even means. They don't normally see any of our network protocol messages.

Suggestion:

```suggestion
In the case where schema validation is enforced, when the client updates the Storage Tree, the Liveblocks server verifies that the update is matches the defined schema. Only if the verification succeeds, the storage data gets updated and synchronized with other users (clients) in the room.  If the schema validation fails, the mutation gets rejected. Storage will not be updated, other clients will never see the mutation, and the client that made the mutation will throw an error, so the developer can fix it. This should only happen in development mode, and it's an issue that should be fixed by the developer — much like how you would have to fix a TypeScript error before publishing it to production.
```

## Create a schema
To create a schema, you will need to POST to the schemas endpoint:
```ts
POST https://api.liveblocks.io/v2/schemas
{
  "id": "some-id",
  "name": "Your schema name",

>   "data": `{
>     // your data schema will go here
>   }`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  "data": `
    type Storage {
      // your data schema will go here
    }
  `,
```

}

> type Body = {
>   id: string, // MAX_LENGTH = 64 / allowed characters az-
>   name: string, // MAX_LENGTH = 256
>   data: string,
> }

Reviewer 2: This can be removed.

```suggestion
```

```

> Note that the data type will be of type string because the schema will be string interpolated. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the data type will be of type string because the schema will be parsed. For more information, see our [Schema Language documentation](xxx).
```

The operation above creates the schema, but it has not yet been assigned to a Room.  To attach this schema to a Room, you will POST to the rooms endpoint:
```ts
POST https://api.liveblocks.io/v2/rooms/{id}/schema
{

>   "schema": "some-id"

Reviewer 2: After some PR review back-and-forth, @BitPhinix and I changed this request body today, to match with the returned value from the `POST /v2/schemas` response body above.

```suggestion
  "versionId": "some-id"
```

Reviewer 2: See also, the updated tech design.

Author: perfect thanks for the update

}
```
## The validation process in practice

> If you would like to work through an example, you can follow along by using the Multiplayer Form example.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you would like to work through an example, you can follow along by using the [Multiplayer Form](/examples/multiplayer-form/nextjs) example.
```

So that people know where to go if they're curious about it

Reviewer: Side note, @stevenfabre: can you confirm that this example should be renamed `Collaborative form` and not `Multiplayer form` after our repositioning?

Author: I can check in the preview to validate, else, I can rename as a separate PR @stevenfabre and update convention here

Author: In preview I still see multiple examples being referred to as Mutliplayer (including the form)

The schema we will define for the example is the following:
```ts
POST https://api.liveblocks.io/v2/schemas

{
  "id": "collaborative-form",
  "name": "Collaborative Form",
  "data": `
    type Logo {
      name: String
      theme: String
    }
    type Storage {
      logo: LiveObject<Logo>
    }
  `
}
// 200 Response
{

>    "id": "collaborative-form",
>    "name": "Collaborative Form",
>    "data": "schema",
>    "version": 1,

Reviewer 2: We also changed this shape:

```suggestion
   "versionId": "collaborative-form@1",
   "schemaId": "collaborative-form",
   "name": "Collaborative Form",
```

   "createdAt": "2023-01-22T15:10:25.225Z",
   "updatedAt": "2023-01-22T15:10:25.225Z"
}
```

To attach this schema to a Room, you will POST to the rooms endpoint:

```ts
POST https://api.liveblocks.io/v2/rooms/{id}/schema
{

>   "schema": "collaborative-form@1"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  "versionId": "collaborative-form@1"
```

}
```

To simulate the importance of schema validation and also demonstrate how operations can fail, we will change nested value of `name` to `organization`:

```tsx file="_app.tsx"
    <RoomProvider
      id={roomId}
      initialPresence={{ focusedId: null }}
      initialStorage={{
        logo: new LiveObject({
          organization: "Acme Inc.",
          theme: "light",
        }),
      }}
    >

> ```

Reviewer 2: Great example, but it won't work in `initialStorage` unfortunately (because that will only populate an _empty_ room). If you want to illustrate this failure, you will have to make the change in the "onChange" handler in this example, where it runs the `root.get('logo').set('name', e.target.Value)` code and change it to `root.get('logo').set('organisation', e.target.Value)` instead.

While at it, you can also illustrate other/different failures:
- `root.get('logo').set('name', 42)` (not a string value)
- `root.get('logo').delete('name')` (cannot delete the "name" field as it isn't optional)

Reviewer 2: We're working on those details still, but early next week we should have a better picture of it in detail. Trying to get it all worked out before the launch.

Author: perfect thanks, just wanted to make sure i wasn't missing something here :)

In index.tsx, we will then update all references from `name` to `organization`.  This is a simple but common instance of updating variable names which could easily break our integration. 
After updating this and running locally, we should now see an error because our deployed schema and client code are out of sync.

<!----Insert sample failure message here, once this is released.  You also mentioned demonstrating a refresh, but I have no way to record this currently !--->

> When an instance like this occurs, the hope is that these errors should only occur in development because your app will not function properly without resolving the errors. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an instance like this occurs, it's indicative of a bug in your app, which should be fixed in development, just like how you have to fix a TypeScript bug in your application before shipping it. 
```

<!----I believe the plan here was to insert some components that were used on the comments page --->
We’re opening up a private beta waitlist

CTA to sign up for it, and to let us know their use case for it 
<!--- -->

> ## What's to Come

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## What's to come
```

Titles should be sentence case

loaded from the server. To add schema validation to your application, take the
following steps:

1. Define the shape of your storage with a schema definition (similar to how you
   would describe the storage type in TypeScript)
2. Attach your schema to a room

By default, a room storage accepts any modifications coming from the client. But
once you attach a schema to a room, Liveblocks will reject any modifications to
the storage that do not match the schema you provided. Situations like this
should only happen in development mode, and the developer is responsible for
fixing them.

## Create a schema

Creating a schema via the dashboard is straightforward. Simply navigate to the
“Schemas” page in the project you want to add the schema to, and click on the
“Create schema” button. Provide a name and a definition that describes the shape
of the data you want to store in your rooms.

<Figure>
  <video autoPlay loop muted playsInline>
    <source
      src="/images/docs/schema-validation/create-schema-dashboard.mp4"
      type="video/mp4"
    />
  </video>
</Figure>

<Banner title="Schema language specification">

Take a look at our

> [language specification](/docs/pages/guides/schema-validation/language) to learn

Reviewer 3: Page is missing, or link is dead

Reviewer: This is on the todo to accomplish before releasing it: 
https://github.com/liveblocks/liveblocks/pull/647#issuecomment-1418317443

more about what kind of validations are currently supported.

</Banner>

## The validation process in practice

If you would like to work through an example, you can follow along by using the
[Multiplayer Form example](/examples/multiplayer-form/nextjs).

> Let’s create a schema called `collaborative-form`, with the following

Reviewer 3: We need to keep a coherence here. 
- Call the schwma `multiplayer-form`, or 
- Rename the example "Collaborative Form example"

I'd go with renaming the example personally

Reviewer: We need to rename https://liveblocks.io/examples/multiplayer-form/nextjs first

Reviewer: Will not be done in the scope on this PR

definition:

```
type Logo {
  name: String
  theme: String
}

type Storage {
  logo: LiveObject<Logo>
}
```

Schemas are versionned to facilitate migrations. To attach a schema to a room,
you need to specify a version. A version id take the form
`{schema-name}@{schema-version}`.

To attach the schema we just created to a room, call the following endpoint:

```ts
POST https://api.liveblocks.io/v2/rooms/{id}/schema
{
  "schema": "collaborative-form@1"
}
```

To simulate the importance of schema validation and also demonstrate how

> operations can fail, we will change the nested value of `name` in Storage to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
operations can fail, we will change the nested value of `name` in storage to
```

`organization` by renaming the `updateName` function and updating its

> parameters. First, we will relace:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
parameters. First, we will replace:
```

```tsx file="index.tsx"
const updateName = useMutation(({ storage }, name: string) => {
  storage.get("logo").set("name", name);
}, []);
```

with

```tsx file="index.tsx"
const updateName = useMutation(({ storage }, name: string) => {
  storage.get("logo").set("organization", name);
}, []);
```

This is a simple but common instance of updating variable names, which could
easily break our integration.

After updating and running locally, we should now see the following error

> because our deployed schema and client code are out of sync.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
because our deployed schema and client code are out of sync:
```

```
Error: Storage mutation rejected by the server.
Field "organization" does not exist on type "Logo".
```

Other examples where schema validation would catch the error include:

- Attempting to update the value of the `name` variable to a number, as it is
  defined as a string
- Attempting to delete the `name` variable: it was not defined as optional in
  the schema

> When an instance like this occurs, it’s indicative of a bug in your app, which
> you should fix in development, just like how you have to fix a TypeScript bug in
> your application before shipping it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When an instance like this occurs, it’s indicative of a bug in your app. You should fix it, just like you would, for a TypeScript bug.
```

Feels more straightforward. Thoughts?
